---
layout: post
title:  "Version 0.14 released!"
author: dominik
tags: API GitHub FreeBSD Linux MSVC Bii Homebrew
---

Version 0.14 of CAF has just been released. This release improves
several CAF internals, fixes bugs (primarily of type-safe actors),
adds an optional ASIO backend, and makes three changes to the API:

- `timed_sync_send` has been removed (it offered an alternative way of
  defining message handlers, which is inconsistent with the rest of the API)
- the policy classes `broadcast`, `random`, and `round_robin` in `actor_pool`
  were removed and replaced by factory functions using the same name
- all functions that were deprecated with 0.10 were finally removed

We have also refined our policy regarding supporting compilers and
improved our testing setup:

- CAF always required a recent compiler and we are eager to adopt new language
  features and to catch up with C++14 (and C++17).
  On the other hand, we are aware that changing the compiler every
  few months is not acceptable for most users. As a compromise between
  progressivity and stability, we support versions of GCC and Clang that are
  up to two years old. Consequently, support for GCC 4.7 has been dropped
  with 0.14.

- We are continuously working on increasing the number of distribution channels
  for CAF. At the moment, we provide a FreeBSD port, a Homebrew package,
  Biicode integration, and Linux packages via the OpenSuSE build service.
  You can find a full list with links etc. in the
  [Get CAF Section](https://github.com/actor-framework/actor-framework#get-caf)
  of the README.

- We have integrated several tools to constantly improve the code quality of
  CAF. Each pushed commit to `develop` is automatically tested via Jenkins on
  several operating systems and compilers. Our current setup includes:
  
  + Ubuntu (32 and 64 bit)
  + Fedora 22
  + Mac OS 10.10
  + Mac OS 10.9
  + FreeBSD 10
  
  Further, we test our code on GCC 4.8, GCC 4.9, GCC 5.1, Clang 3.5, and
  Clang 3.6. For static code analysis, we use
  [Coverity](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/5555) and
  [cppcheck](http://mobi39.cpt.haw-hamburg.de/job/CAF/job/develop%20branch%20cppcheck/).
  These tools are complemented with ASAN and LeakSanitizer.

- In case you are waiting for MSVC support: we are currently testing on the
  latest RC from Microsoft. It appears that MSVC is not able to compile
  advanced match cases and `libcaf_io` does compile but its unit tests
  fail. Any feedback or help to get the IO parts working (or all parts
  of CAF compiling) is welcome. To check on the current progress please
  visit [Issue #302 on GitHub](https://github.com/actor-framework/actor-framework/issues/302).