---
layout: post
title:  "Version 0.16 Finally Released!"
author: dominik
tags: API GitHub Streaming
---

We are excited to announce version 0.16 of the C++ Actor Framework! Among other
features and improvements, this release adds experimental support for
*streams*.

Streams in CAF are now the fourth pillar of our communication layer and
complement asnychronous messaging, publish/subscribe groups, and
request/response protocols. Fundamentally, streams give you bounded queueing of
pipelined messages with backpressure. This means they provide a safe channel
for sending arbitrary amounts of data without worrying about overloading
receivers.

Of course streams are first-class citizens in CAF. Actors can have any number
of active streams and can modify existing streams at runtime, for example by
adding more sources or sinks to it. This gives actors a powerful new tool that
required a lot of changes under the hood. Without going into too much detail,
actor mailboxes now consist of several internal queues that allow seamless
multiplexing of regular actor messages and stream traffic. You can find an
introduction to streams with code examples in our new manual section.

Expect your projects to run and compile after updating to 0.16, since this
release brings no breaking changes. However, you might get warnings for
deprecated member variables in `actor_system_config`. We have improved support
for runtime configurations in CAF by adding
[lists, durations and dictionaries](https://github.com/actor-framework/evolution/blob/master/proposals/0002-lists-durations-and-dictionaries-in-configs.md)
and made settings available by name instead of requiring access to member
variables:

```c++
// Deprecated API:
auto verbosity = cfg.logger_verbosity;

// New API:
auto verbosity = get_or(cfg, "logger.verbosity", defaults::logger::verbosity);
```

CAF 0.16 bundles constants unter `defaults::<component>`. This may seem like
strictly more overhead and typing at first, but now you can access custom
options in the same way, without having to know the subtype in order to access
some member variable. Your application could add the option `database.host`,
for example, and you would access it directly from the system-wide config. No
downcasting to the subtype of `actor_config_server` required.

Got no default? Use `get_if` instead. The API is modelled after C++17's
[`get_if`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/variant/get_if), i.e., you
could query a parameter as follows:

```c++
auto host = get_if<std::string>(&cfg, "database.host");
if (!host) {
  std::cerr << "database host missing" << std::endl;
  // ...
} else {
  std::cout << "connect to database host " << *host << std::endl;
  // ...
}
```
