---
layout: post
title:  "Spotlight: Lumicks"
author: dominik
tags: Spotlight Lumicks
---

For this spotlight, we dive into the world of molecular research and talk to
the software team of the highly ambitioned startup Lumicks at Amsterdam HQ.

# Background: Lumicks

<img class="centered-image" src="{{ site.url }}/static/img/lumicks.png"
     alt="Official Lumicks Logo">

Lumicks manufactures dynamic single-molecule analysis equipment. Their
breakthrough technologies enable---for the first time---visualization of
molecular interactions and acoustic manipulation of biomolecules. With their
products, Lumicks helps scientists to understand life to the smallest detail,
which is critical for cancer research and drug development.

Founded in 2014, Lumicks quickly became a success story. Today, research sites
all around the world have adopted Lumicks technology: from UC Berkeley at the
U.S. west coast all the way to ShanghaiTech University in far east China.

# The Interview

__CAF Team__: Dear Lumicks team, thank you for taking the time speaking to us!
Lumicks works hard to deliver unique insights into biological processes at a
molecular level. A [recent article in The
Scientist](https://www.the-scientist.com/modus-operandi/dancing-cells-65127/amp)
speaks about using sound waves to capture cells, which is a process you use for
some of your products, while other products mention optical tweezers. A bit
exaggerated: How can lasers and music help us to cure cancer? Without going
into too much detail, how would you explain what your products do for people
like us that don't have degrees in molecular biology?

__...__:

__CAF Team__: You are working with very small scales but very high resolutions.
We can imagine it takes quite a lot of data processing in real-time in order to
visualize the experiments and allow scientists to manipulate individual
proteins or cells while stuying their behavior. What are the biggest software
engineering challenges that you faced during initial product development?

__...__:

__CAF Team__: Many scientists around the world rely on Lumicks products for
their research or drug development. At the same time, you are constantly
working to improve user experience and to deliver new features. What is your
process for making sure your users always have a robust setup they can rely on
while still bringing new features and improvements to your customers?

__...__:

__CAF Team__: A big part of software engineering is constant learning about the
problem domain and iterating on a prototype until a robust solution emerges.
However, we can't iterate endlessly. Time to market is very crucial, even
critical in a startup like Lumicks. What brings the actor model, and CAF in
particular, to the table that helps you iterating faster and reaching a
sophisticated solution in reasonable time?

__...__:

__CAF Team__: How did you learn about CAF and what convinced you to use it over
other frameworks?

__...__:

__CAF Team__: How would you summarize your experience with CAF so far? What was
the first version you've used? Were there any unexpected obstacles in adopting
CAF or aha moments?

__...__:

__CAF Team__: You develop all of your software in house with an international
team of software engineers. How do you introduce new team members to CAF and
how would you describe the learning curve them?

__...__:

__CAF Team__: What could CAF do better to smooth out the learning curve and
help developers being more productive?

__...__:

__CAF Team__: Final question: if you were to decide what the next feature of
CAF would be, what would you have in mind?

__...__:

__CAF Team__: Thank you very much for this interview! We wish you and your team
all the great success in helping scientists around the world to undestand---and
hopefully cure!---diseases such as cancer and Alzheimer's!
